Packet Tracer - Configure Initial Router Settings

Objectives
Part 1: Verify the Default Router Configuration

Part 2: Configure and Verify the Initial Router Configuration

Part 3: Save the Running Configuration File

Background
In this activity, you will perform basic router configuration tasks. You will secure access to the CLI and console port using encrypted and plain-text passwords. You will also configure messages for users who are logging into the router. These banners warn unauthorized users that access is prohibited. Finally, you will verify and save your running configuration.

Instructions
Part 1: Verify the Default Router Configuration
Step 1: Establish a console connection to R1.
a.     Choose a Console cable from the available connections.

b.     Click PCA and select RS 232.

c.     Click R1 and select Console.

d.     Click PCA > Desktop tab > Terminal.

e.     Click OK and press ENTER. You are now able to configure R1.

Step 2: Enter privileged mode and examine the current configuration.
You can access all the router commands from privileged EXEC mode. However, because many of the privileged commands configure operating parameters, privileged access should be password-protected to prevent unauthorized use.

a.     Enter privileged EXEC mode by entering the enable command.

Open a configuration window

Router> enable

Router#

Notice that the prompt changed in the configuration to reflect privileged EXEC mode.

b.     Enter the show running-config command.

Router# show running-config

Questions:
What is the router’s hostname?
Router

How many Fast Ethernet interfaces does the Router have?
4

How many Gigabit Ethernet interfaces does the Router have?
2

How many Serial interfaces does the router have?
2

What is the range of values shown for the vty lines?
0-4

c.     Display the current contents of NVRAM.

Router# show startup-config

startup-config is not present

Question:
Why does the router respond with the startup-config is not present message?
karena file konfigurasi tidak tersimpan dalam NVRAM

Close a configuration window

Part 2: Configure and Verify the Initial Router Configuration
To configure parameters on a router, you may be required to move between various configuration modes. Notice how the prompt changes as you navigate through the IOS configuration modes.

Step 1: Configure the initial settings on R1.
Note: If you have difficulty remembering the commands, refer to the content for this topic. The commands are the same as you configured on a switch.

Open a configuration window

a.     Configure R1 as the hostname.

b.     Configure Message of the day text: Unauthorized access is strictly prohibited.

c.     Encrypt all plain text passwords.

Use the following passwords:

1)    Privileged EXEC, unencrypted: cisco

2)    Privileged EXEC, encrypted: itsasecret

3)    Console: letmein

Step 2: Verify the initial settings on R1.
Open a configuration window

a.     Verify the initial settings by viewing the configuration for R1.

Question:
What command do you use?
show running-config

b.     Exit the current console session until you see the following message:

R1 con0 is now available

 

Press RETURN to get started.

c.     Press ENTER; you should see the following message:

Unauthorized access is strictly prohibited.

 

User Access Verification

 

Password:

Questions:
Why should every router have a message-of-the-day (MOTD) banner?
agar ketika pengguna atau pengaksees ingin mengakses maka dapat membaca pesan atau message yang disediakan

If you are not prompted for a password before reaching the user EXEC prompt, what console line command did you forget to configure?
R1(config-line)#login

d.     Enter the passwords necessary to return to privileged EXEC mode.

Questions:
Why would the enable secret password allow access to the privileged EXEC mode and the enable password no longer be valid?
enable secret password menggantikan enable password. Jika keduanya dikonfigurasi pada router, kita harus memasukkan enable secret password untuk masuk ke privieged EXEC mode.

If you configure any more passwords on the router, are they displayed in the configuration file as plain text or in encrypted form? Explain.
enkripsi password command berguna untuk mengenkripsi semua kata sandi yang digunakan saat ini maupun password yang akan datang

Close a configuration window

Part 3: Save the Running Configuration File
Step 1: Save the configuration file to NVRAM.
a.     You have configured the initial settings for R1. Now back up the running configuration file to NVRAM to ensure that the changes made are not lost if the system is rebooted or loses power.

Open a configuration window

Questions:
What command did you enter to save the configuration to NVRAM?
copy running-config startup-config

What is the shortest, unambiguous version of this command?
cop r st

Close a configuration windowVerify that all of the parameters configured are recorded. If not, analyze the output and determine 
which commands were not executed or were entered incorrectly. 
show startup-configuration or show start

You can also click Check Results in the instruction window.

Step 2: Optional: Save the startup configuration file to flash.
Although you will be learning more about managing the flash storage in a router in later chapters, you may be interested to know that, as an added backup procedure, you can save your startup configuration file to flash. By default, the router still loads the startup configuration from NVRAM, but if NVRAM becomes corrupt, you can restore the startup configuration by copying it over from flash.

Complete the following steps to save the startup configuration to flash.

Open a configuration window

a.     Examine the contents of flash using the show flash command:

R1# show flash

Questions:
How many files are currently stored in flash?
3

Which of these files would you guess is the IOS image?
c1900-universalk9-mz.SPA.151-4.M4.bin

Why do you think this file is the IOS image?
karena pada akhir nama file menggunakan format .bin

R1# copy startup-config flash

Destination filename [startup-config]

The router prompts you to store the file in flash using the name in brackets. If the answer is yes, then press ENTER; if not, type an appropriate name and press ENTER.

b.     Use the show flash command to verify the startup configuration file is now stored in flash.